he's Kurt Bullard who goes to Harvard
the Harvard Crimson sports writer part
of this sports analysis collective Kurt
I got a Dartmouth guy in the room
mclovin so you have to understand that
yeah yeah sorry sorry about that could
you've gotten into Dartmouth um I think
so you know we'll never know well if you
got into Harvard you should be able to
get into Dartmouth like was Dartmouth
you're safe safety yo school hey Dan
okay okay I want to make a mad but I'm
not gonna say no all right explain to me
what the Harvard sports analysis
collective does so essentially just to
the collection of 25 to 30 students who
are interested in sports Harvard usually
not a hotbed of sports fandom but there
are a few of us who are really into
sports and just like to look at sports
in different ways so there's this more
serious like prediction models so we've
done prediction models like this fo one
we've also done a prediction model on
whether a plug coach we fight or not and
then there's more fun post so my friend
wrote one on who is the biggest partier
in the NBA based on who performs worse
on Sundays and turns out it's JR smith
which is no surprise so there's two
different types of things we do that's
pretty cool keeps me busy at school so
you're looking at saturday night of the
aftershocks of saturday night on a
sunday game and JR smith proved to be
the biggest partier yeah that's what
happened okay okay so you came up with
the formula for the NFL what did you
factor in and how did that bring about
the Dolphins going to the Super Bowl so
I there's no easy way to go about this
if there were people will be making a
lot of money on it so I looked at just
the core of a team why the finest the
core so you have you know quarterback
running back two wide receivers tight
end and some of your best offensive
linemen and on your defense you have the
best for in the front seven best two
people in the secondary and I aggregated
what's called their approximate value
statistic and so pro football reference
attributes a numeric value to a player
based on how much they contribute to a
team so quarterbacks tend to get more
where is like
defensive players and you know role
players tend to get less and so a grade
those totals converted those into a
low-ranking which is a way two ranked
teams based on how to interact with each
other and then ran through simulations
of the season based on the wind
probabilities I got from the e
low-ranking so Miami both how to create
core and had a pretty easy schedule if
you look at their schedule I think they
have the Jaguars and Redskins to open up
the season and a pretty easy schedule
from there on out so just the
combination of those two made them uh
have you favorite to make the playoffs
in the SE you got to slow down a little
bit here Kurt okay cuz you know they got
a lot of C students here in the room and
all Dartmouth students do so Wow whoa
did you understand what he was saying
McCoy say under solution doesn't mean
that it's valid it's it's one way of
looking at it this is what I didn't
understand Kurt you didn't factor in
coaching why that's true i mean it's
very tough to quantify and there's no
way to really quantify and i was looking
up from a quantitative basis so you do
have like Joe Philbin who you know you
look at balichek and you look at Joe
Philbin I'm pretty sure ninety-nine
percent of the population would choose
one coach over the other I won't say
which but that's one flaw of the systems
that you know you can't really factor in
coaching and so obviously these
probabilities are probably not entirely
accurate based on that fact but it just
gives you a ballpark estimate of where
these teams are at going into the season
mclovin would you like to respond well I
mean Kurt if I may hurt well obviously
like the approximate value doesn't look
at the fact that you have Jordy Nelson's
in the top five he's there because Aaron
Rodgers is throwing him the ball you're
not accounting teamwork which is why
football can't be measured by like
baseball and basketball it's all about
the team everything you do is impacted
by everything that happens next we like
Mario Williams and Marcell Dareus are
both in the top ten but obviously they
both make each other's job easier so
it's not a real approximate value is
really inaccurate I think for players
it's just a very rough measurement oh no
it absolutely is a very rough
measurement but it's probably the best
one out there and that's why I used it
like you said you know you have Jordy
Nelson what I think is probably
10 waters he runs own honestly based on
you look at the NFL top 100 that came
out and obviously that's not entirely
accurate you have some yep admin Terry
is a top hundred player on that list but
if you look at players across the league
given cornerbacks are saying that Jordy
Nelson on his own is a very good quarter
wide receiver obviously helps have Aaron
Rodgers but on zoning is pretty good and
like you said there are interaction
terms it's not baseball where you know
you're hitting and no one else is really
affecting how you're hitting is like if
your water Seaver depends on your
quarterback it's done it's on your
offensive line it depends on what water
severs you're playing but this is just
it was supposed to be a speculative
exercise that happened to get a lot of
attention and and one viral which is uh
has been pretty cool for me but
obviously like you say there are some
flaws in the system well that's why hold
on Kurt mclovin has one more photo what
were a quick question Kurt the
quarterback seems to be underestimated
B's the bills and the tent and the Jets
are in the top ten of your list the
numbers add up for them like when you
saw them that high didn't concern you
that they have unsettled quarterback
situations all right obviously it does a
little the Jets I thought were pretty
high but I decided not to try to make
too many changes you don't want to over
fit the system based on you know your
preferences beforehand you try to be as
unbiased as possible when you're trying
to make these things because you don't
want to make a model and have some
preconception what the results should be
and try to tailor your model so it fits
that obviously Geno Smith not the
greatest quarterback in the league and
same thing with the bills their
quarterback situation is a mess Tyrod
Taylor even might come out and start for
that team so obviously they're a little
high but their defenses are just very
strong some of the best in the league so
they could make that a fight in the SES
for sure well Kurt congrats on going
viral there and you know going after
mclovin a little bit there it's mclovin
any follow up there it felt like drop
the mic there by Chris comment occur
you're a lot younger you might want to
look up the Ivy League football results
from 1993 through 1997 four titles for
the big green no big deal this is kind
of an Ivy League version of eight mile I
like to think so yeah but who's Eminem I
think that's me huh okay good luck with
this Kurt thanks for joining us thank
you all right that's a curt Bullard he's
a junior at Harvard officer of the
Harvard sports at
Ellis's collective student-run
organization at Harvard dedicated to the
quantitative analysis of sports strategy
and management